---
layout: lecture
title: "Metaprogramming"
details: build systems, dependency management, testing, CI
date: 2020-01-27
ready: true
video:
  aspect: 56.25
  id: _Ms1Z4xfqv4
---

What do we mean by "metaprogramming"? Well, it was the best collective
term we could come up with for the set of things that are more about
_process_ than they are about writing code or working more efficiently.
In this lecture, we will look at systems for building and testing your
code, and for managing dependencies. These may seem like they are of
limited importance in your day-to-day as a student, but the moment you
interact with a larger code base through an internship or once you enter
the "real world", you will see this everywhere. We should note that
"metaprogramming" can also mean "[programs that operate on
programs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metaprogramming)", whereas that
is not quite the definition we are using for the purposes of this
lecture.

# Build systems

If you write a paper in LaTeX, what are the commands you need to run to
produce your paper? What about the ones used to run your benchmarks,
plot them, and then insert that plot into your paper? Or to compile the
code provided in the class you're taking and then running the tests?

For most projects, whether they contain code or not, there is a "build
process". Some sequence of operations you need to do to go from your
inputs to your outputs. Often, that process might have many steps, and
many branches. Run this to generate this plot, that to generate those
results, and something else to produce the final paper. As with so many
of the things we have seen in this class, you are not the first to
encounter this annoyance, and luckily there exist many tools to help
you!

These are usually called "build systems", and there are _many_ of them.
Which one you use depends on the task at hand, your language of
preference, and the size of the project. At their core, they are all
very similar though. You define a number of _dependencies_, a number of
_targets_, and _rules_ for going from one to the other. You tell the
build system that you want a particular target, and its job is to find
all the transitive dependencies of that target, and then apply the rules
to produce intermediate targets all the way until the final target has
been produced. Ideally, the build system does this without unnecessarily
executing rules for targets whose dependencies haven't changed and where
the result is available from a previous build.

`make` is one of the most common build systems out there, and you will
usually find it installed on pretty much any UNIX-based computer. It has
its warts, but works quite well for simple-to-moderate projects. When
you run `make`, it consults a file called `Makefile` in the current
directory. All the targets, their dependencies, and the rules are
defined in that file. Let's take a look at one:

```make
paper.pdf: paper.tex plot-data.png
	pdflatex paper.tex

plot-%.png: %.dat plot.py
	./plot.py -i $*.dat -o $@
```

Each directive in this file is a rule for how to produce the left-hand
side using the right-hand side. Or, phrased differently, the things
named on the right-hand side are dependencies, and the left-hand side is
the target. The indented block is a sequence of programs to produce the
target from those dependencies. In `make`, the first directive also
defines the default goal. If you run `make` with no arguments, this is
the target it will build. Alternatively, you can run something like
`make plot-data.png`, and it will build that target instead.

The `%` in a rule is a "pattern", and will match the same string on the
left and on the right. For example, if the target `plot-foo.png` is
requested, `make` will look for the dependencies `foo.dat` and
`plot.py`. Now let's look at what happens if we run `make` with an empty
source directory.

```console
$ make
make: *** No rule to make target 'paper.tex', needed by 'paper.pdf'.  Stop.
```

`make` is helpfully telling us that in order to build `paper.pdf`, it
needs `paper.tex`, and it has no rule telling it how to make that file.
Let's try making it!

```console
$ touch paper.tex
$ make
make: *** No rule to make target 'plot-data.png', needed by 'paper.pdf'.  Stop.
```

Hmm, interesting, there _is_ a rule to make `plot-data.png`, but it is a
pattern rule. Since the source files do not exist (`data.dat`), `make`
simply states that it cannot make that file. Let's try creating all the
files:

```console
$ cat paper.tex
\documentclass{article}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\begin{document}
\includegraphics[scale=0.65]{plot-data.png}
\end{document}
$ cat plot.py
#!/usr/bin/env python
import matplotlib
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import numpy as np
import argparse

parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
parser.add_argument('-i', type=argparse.FileType('r'))
parser.add_argument('-o')
args = parser.parse_args()

data = np.loadtxt(args.i)
plt.plot(data[:, 0], data[:, 1])
plt.savefig(args.o)
$ cat data.dat
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 8
```

Now what happens if we run `make`?

```console
$ make
./plot.py -i data.dat -o plot-data.png
pdflatex paper.tex
... lots of output ...
```

And look, it made a PDF for us!
What if we run `make` again?

```console
$ make
make: 'paper.pdf' is up to date.
```

It didn't do anything! Why not? Well, because it didn't need to. It
checked that all of the previously-built targets were still up to date
with respect to their listed dependencies. We can test this by modifying
`paper.tex` and then re-running `make`:

```console
$ vim paper.tex
$ make
pdflatex paper.tex
...
```

Notice that `make` did _not_ re-run `plot.py` because that was not
necessary; none of `plot-data.png`'s dependencies changed!

# Dependency management

At a more macro level, your software projects are likely to have
dependencies that are themselves projects. You might depend on installed
programs (like `python`), system packages (like `openssl`), or libraries
within your programming language (like `matplotlib`). These days, most
dependencies will be available through a _repository_ that hosts a
large number of such dependencies in a single place, and provides a
convenient mechanism for installing them. Some examples include the
Ubuntu package repositories for Ubuntu system packages, which you access
through the `apt` tool, RubyGems for Ruby libraries, PyPI for Python
libraries, or the Arch User Repository for Arch Linux user-contributed
packages.

Since the exact mechanisms for interacting with these repositories vary
a lot from repository to repository and from tool to tool, we won't go
too much into the details of any specific one in this lecture. What we
_will_ cover is some of the common terminology they all use. The first
among these is _versioning_. Most projects that other projects depend on
issue a _version number_ with every release. Usually something like
8.1.3 or 64.1.20192004. They are often, but not always, numerical.
Version numbers serve many purposes, and one of the most important of
them is to ensure that software keeps working. Imagine, for example,
that I release a new version of my library where I have renamed a
particular function. If someone tried to build some software that
depends on my library after I release that update, the build might fail
because it calls a function that no longer exists! Versioning attempts
to solve this problem by letting a project say that it depends on a
particular version, or range of versions, of some other project. That
way, even if the underlying library changes, dependent software
continues building by using an older version of my library.

That also isn't ideal though! What if I issue a security update which
does _not_ change the public interface of my library (its "API"), and
which any project that depended on the old version should immediately
start using? This is where the different groups of numbers in a version
come in. The exact meaning of each one varies between projects, but one
relatively common standard is [_semantic
versioning_](https://semver.org/). With semantic versioning, every
version number is of the form: major.minor.patch. The rules are:

 - If a new release does not change the API, increase the patch version.
 - If you _add_ to your API in a backwards-compatible way, increase the
   minor version.
 - If you change the API in a non-backwards-compatible way, increase the
   major version.

This already provides some major advantages. Now, if my project depends
on your project, it _should_ be safe to use the latest release with the
same major version as the one I built against when I developed it, as
long as its minor version is at least what it was back then. In other
words, if I depend on your library at version `1.3.7`, then it _should_
be fine to build it with `1.3.8`, `1.6.1`, or even `1.3.0`. Version
`2.2.4` would probably not be okay, because the major version was
increased. We can see an example of semantic versioning in Python's
version numbers. Many of you are probably aware that Python 2 and Python
3 code do not mix very well, which is why that was a _major_ version
bump. Similarly, code written for Python 3.5 might run fine on Python
3.7, but possibly not on 3.4.

When working with dependency management systems, you may also come
across the notion of _lock files_. A lock file is simply a file that
lists the exact version you are _currently_ depending on of each
dependency. Usually, you need to explicitly run an update program to
upgrade to newer versions of your dependencies. There are many reasons
for this, such as avoiding unnecessary recompiles, having reproducible
builds, or not automatically updating to the latest version (which may
be broken). An extreme version of this kind of dependency locking is
_vendoring_, which is where you copy all the code of your dependencies
into your own project. That gives you total control over any changes to
it, and lets you introduce your own changes to it, but also means you
have to explicitly pull in any updates from the upstream maintainers
over time.

# Continuous integration systems

As you work on larger and larger projects, you'll find that there are
often additional tasks you have to do whenever you make a change to it.
You might have to upload a new version of the documentation, upload a
compiled version somewhere, release the code to pypi, run your test
suite, and all sort of other things. Maybe every time someone sends you
a pull request on GitHub, you want their code to be style checked and
you want some benchmarks to run? When these kinds of needs arise, it's
time to take a look at continuous integration.

Continuous integration, or CI, is an umbrella term for "stuff that runs
whenever your code changes", and there are many companies out there that
provide various types of CI, often for free for open-source projects.
Some of the big ones are Travis CI, Azure Pipelines, and GitHub Actions.
They all work in roughly the same way: you add a file to your repository
that describes what should happen when various things happen to that
repository. By far the most common one is a rule like "when someone
pushes code, run the test suite". When the event triggers, the CI
provider spins up a virtual machines (or more), runs the commands in
your "recipe", and then usually notes down the results somewhere. You
might set it up so that you are notified if the test suite stops
passing, or so that a little badge appears on your repository as long as
the tests pass.

As an example of a CI system, the class website is set up using GitHub
Pages. Pages is a CI action that runs the Jekyll blog software on every
push to `master` and makes the built site available on a particular
GitHub domain. This makes it trivial for us to update the website! We
just make our changes locally, commit them with git, and then push. CI
takes care of the rest.

## A brief aside on testing

Most large software projects come with a "test suite". You may already
be familiar with the general concept of testing, but we thought we'd
quickly mention some approaches to testing and testing terminology that
you may encounter in the wild:

 - Test suite: a collective term for all the tests
 - Unit test: a "micro-test" that tests a specific feature in isolation
 - Integration test: a "macro-test" that runs a larger part of the
   system to check that different feature or components work _together_.
 - Regression test: a test that implements a particular pattern that
   _previously_ caused a bug to ensure that the bug does not resurface.
 - Mocking: to replace a function, module, or type with a fake
   implementation to avoid testing unrelated functionality. For example,
   you might "mock the network" or "mock the disk".

# Exercises

 1. Most makefiles provide a target called `clean`. This isn't intended
    to produce a file called `clean`, but instead to clean up any files
    that can be re-built by make. Think of it as a way to "undo" all of
    the build steps. Implement a `clean` target for the `paper.pdf`
    `Makefile` above. You will have to make the target
    [phony](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/html_node/Phony-Targets.html).
    You may find the [`git
    ls-files`](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-ls-files) subcommand useful.
    A number of other very common make targets are listed
    [here](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/html_node/Standard-Targets.html#Standard-Targets).
 2. Take a look at the various ways to specify version requirements for
    dependencies in [Rust's build
    system](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/specifying-dependencies.html).
    Most package repositories support similar syntax. For each one
    (caret, tilde, wildcard, comparison, and multiple), try to come up
    with a use-case in which that particular kind of requirement makes
    sense.
 3. Git can act as a simple CI system all by itself. In `.git/hooks`
    inside any git repository, you will find (currently inactive) files
    that are run as scripts when a particular action happens. Write a
    [`pre-commit`](https://git-scm.com/docs/githooks#_pre_commit) hook
    that runs `make paper.pdf` and refuses the commit if the `make`
    command fails. This should prevent any commit from having an
    unbuildable version of the paper.
 4. Set up a simple auto-published page using [GitHub
    Pages](https://pages.github.com/).
    Add a [GitHub Action](https://github.com/features/actions) to the
    repository to run `shellcheck` on any shell files in that
    repository (here is [one way to do
    it](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/shellcheck)). Check that
    it works!
 5. [Build your
    own](https://help.github.com/en/actions/automating-your-workflow-with-github-actions/building-actions)
    GitHub action to run [`proselint`](https://github.com/amperser/proselint) or
    [`write-good`](https://github.com/btford/write-good) on all the
    `.md` files in the repository. Enable it in your repository, and
    check that it works by filing a pull request with a typo in it.
